
## Introduction

<!-- This current phrasing would annoy people, just spewing this
out to roughly say what I think is relevant, we can refine later. -->
The study of genetics is currently transforming into a true big-data science.
Since the Human Genome Project, genomics has required working with
signicant volumes of data and the specialised methods
required to transform the raw biological signals into analysable data,
such as assembly[cite], mapping[cite] and variant calling[cite] are compute intensive.
However, beyond these initial steps required to generate the data, the actual
analysis of the genetic variation could typically be performed on a single
computer, and often with ad-hoc software written using shell utilities
and scripting languages such as Perl.
From the Human Genome Project, through 1000 Genomes, and now with
population scale genomics datasets such as UK Biobank, GeL, etc,
the requirements for analysing the data have far outgrown these
methods. Simple queries can require minutes to complete, which
has a negative effect on researcher productivity, as well as limiting
the analyses that can be performed. The financial cost of working
with such datasets is also very large, which limits accessibility
to well-funded groups.

[High-level summary of where things are in terms of data analysis
in genomics, pointing forwards to
the individual use-cases of popgen, statgen etc to discuss the
individual tools.]

Other sciences have been working at the petabyte scale for some time.
[I don't really know the background here, it'll require some research.
Astronomics, geosciences etc have all been working with such large
datasets, and been using Python to do so, successfullly. Concrete
examples]

While some aspects of genomics data are unique and require specialised
tooling, by the time that variants have been called and the we wish
to work on the final stages of analysis, we are usually
working with large n-dimensional arrays of numerical data. Such
datasets are precisely what a large and active community of
developers have been working on in the PyData Ecosystem. The goal
of sgkit is to bring these tools to genomics, using a
shared platform for analysing large arrays of numerical data. In the
following subsections we discuss the key technologies, and how
they appyly to genomics.

### Columnar binary data

Perhaps the most important factor limiting scalability in contemporary genomics
is the continued reliance on row-wise storage of data---most often
encoded as blockwise-compressed text.
[Explain why row-wise is bad without reference to specific genomics applications.]

The Variant Call Format (VCF) is the standard method for interchanging
genomics data. In VCF each row describes the observations for a set of samples
at a given position along the genome, and consists of fixed columns such as the
genome position as well as per-sample columns. [More info]
VCF was introduced as part of the 1000 Genomes project, and works reasonably
well at the scale of 1000s of samples. However, when we have hundreds of
thousands of samples it becomes extremely unwieldy
. For example, the
phased genotypes for 200K samples in UK Biobank produced by Browning [cite]
require X GB of space.
(Note that this file contains no extra INFO keys; in practice a great deal
more information is stored in the VCF leading to files that are orders of
magnitude larger, and requiring them to be split into chunks, further
increasing their unwieldiness.)
Running [a simple query that requires only looking at
one column] on this file like X required Y minutes.

[TODO be more concrete here; what is the thing we're summarising?]
This slow response time to a simple query is primarily caused by the row-wise
nature of VCF (and BCF), because in order to read a single piece of
information about a particular variant site we must read *all* the information
about that site. Then, if we wish to summarise that information over
all sites, then we must read the entire dataset.

A lesser but still significant cause of inefficiency is the use of
text to store the data. [More info]

These issues are of course well known, and there are numerous projects
that seek to alleviate them. [Discuss] They're all quite bespoke to genomics data
through.

In sgkit we use Zarr which although initially introduced to store
genomics data, has now been adopted widely in [X, Y and Z].
Zarr is [description] and has [advantages]

### Distributed computing

Beyond a certain scale of data there is no alternative but to
parallelise calculations across multiple computers if you wish
them to complete in a reasonable timeframe. Classically in
High Performance Computing (HPC) environments, most often used
to perform scientific computing, such distributed computing
is done using the Message Passing Interface (MPI). MPI
typically assumes a low-latency connection between nodes in
cluster, often with specialised hardware interconnects,
and can be used very effectively to [do things like solve big PDEs].
However, MPI is [hard to program and hard to run], and applications
in genomics have been limited to [things like the ABySS assembler].

[Paragraph describing, Big data, Hadoop, MapReduce, Spark, etc. Why
the don't use MPI, that the problem being solved was/is.
Applications to genomics like ADAM were promising, but never really
took off. Hail (see also genomics section) notably does a
bunch of things well, but only by rewriting whole chunks of the
underlying technologies]

We use Dask [for reasons].

### Just-in-time compilation

Many of the analyses that we wish to perform in genomics are unique,
and the ability to quickly put together complex queries using
high-level tools like shell pipelines and scripting languages
is often a major bonus. However, such approaches are often not
viable at the petabyte scale, where efficient compiled code that
uses available CPU resources effectively are required. However,
writing code in compiled languages such as C, C++ or Java
is far more labour intensive, as well as requiring more specialised
software development experience.

Similarly, [scripting languages such as python are great for
contributing to open source libraries, because there's a much
lower barrier to contribution.]

We use numba because [it's awesome].
